---
title: "Onboarding That Works: Strategies for Remote Startup Success"
date: 2024-01-10
tags:
  - startups
  - onboarding
  - process
  - remote
description: "Explore practical strategies for personalized welcome packages, face-to-face communication, and efficient onboarding to create a strong sense of belonging an..."
image: "remote-onboarding.webp"
draft: false
---







In the world of software startups, remote onboarding is not just about getting
your new employees up to speed; it's about making them feel genuinely valued and
connected to your mission from day one. At early-stage companies, where every
hire is a significant leap of faith, onboarding takes on even greater
importance. In this article, we'll explore how to create a unique and memorable
onboarding experience for startup founders and their early-stage employees in
software-based companies.

![A laptop screen displaying a virtual meeting with multiple participants, accompanied by a ceramic mug on a wooden table in the foreground, depicts the new normal of remote collaboration.](remote-onboarding.webp)

## Personalized Welcome Packages:

**Onboarding should be a unique experience demonstrating your commitment to your
new team members.** Consider investing in personalized welcome packages that go
beyond the basics.

While you're likely already spending a substantial amount on equipment, these
packages should include items that show you've thought about them specifically.
These items should also reflect and reinforce your company's mission, purpose,
and values. For example, if your company values adventure and a can-do spirit,
consider including a mug that says, "Adventure Begins." If mental well-being is
a priority, add a handwritten note welcoming them and instructions on redeeming
a year of a meditation app subscription.

In the grand scheme of things, the cost of these personalized items is minimal
compared to the potential benefits of higher employee morale, increased loyalty,
and a deeper connection to your company's mission and values. It's about
creating a memorable and unique onboarding experience that leaves a lasting
positive impression on your new team members, setting the tone for a successful
and fulfilling journey together.

## Focus on the Individual, Not Utility Items:

While utility items like notebooks and pens are essential, they are better
suited for the equipment package rather than the welcome package. The welcome
package should be about the individual, making them feel special and
appreciated.

## Assign a Pal:

Give your new hires a point of contact who isn't their direct supervisorâ€”someone
they can turn to with questions and concerns. New hires often feel uncomfortable
sharing their questions or thoughts in company-wide communication channels. This
person can help them navigate the company culture, protocols, and unwritten
rules, fostering a sense of belonging.

## Embrace Face-to-Face Communication:

In the early onboarding stages, it's crucial to actively encourage and
facilitate video calls within the first 48 hours. While asynchronous workflows
have their merits, even individuals who typically lean towards quick
asynchronous chats, like myself, benefit significantly from being nudged towards
video interactions at the outset. Textual communication, whether chat messages,
code reviews, or design feedback, often needs to be improved in conveying the
nuances of one's mindset and emotions hidden behind the words on the screen.

**By initiating these early video calls, you set the stage for building
essential relational capital** and gaining a deeper understanding of each team
member's personality. This, in turn, enhances overall communication efficiency
and reduces the need for second-guessing the emotional tone of messages. These
initial video calls can take various forms, such as pairing sessions for machine
onboarding, quick company and team history walkthroughs, and discussions about
team dynamics. Importantly, these face-to-face interactions provide a platform
where tone and intonation can be accurately perceived, fostering stronger
connections and smoother collaborations.

## Set Clear Boundaries:

Early-stage startups often involve passionate, driven employees who might blur
the lines between work and personal life. It's crucial to set clear expectations
from the start. Encourage employees to silence notifications at specific hours,
explain your company's approach to asynchronous communication, and clarify
response expectations.

## Streamlined Onboarding Process:

The onboarding experience sets the tone for a new employee's journey. While time
is precious, dedicating half a day to craft a setup script that allows a new
employee to execute a single command can yield tremendous downstream benefits.

A well-structured setup script accelerates the new employee's ability to get
started and sets a precedent of efficiency and attention to detail within the
company. **It sends a clear message that the organization values the time and
experience of its team members**, ultimately contributing to a positive and
productive work environment.

## Mindful Slack Channel Management:

While it may not be the most conventional advice, encouraging team members to
mute as many Slack channels as possible is worth it. Even in smaller companies,
the sheer volume of messages can become overwhelming. Start by minimizing
real-time communication and prioritize recording essential information whenever
it arises.

## Enhance Home Office Setup:

While most startups offer a home office stipend, go the extra mile by providing
a list of useful items that existing team members have found valuable in
improving their setups and processes. This proactive approach helps newcomers
feel supported and well-equipped.

---

**Remote onboarding for early-stage software startups is a unique opportunity to
make a lasting impression on new team members.** By personalizing welcome
packages, fostering face-to-face communication, and setting clear boundaries,
you can create an onboarding experience that sets the right tone for your
company's culture and values. Remember, a well-crafted onboarding process
integrates new employees efficiently and instills a sense of belonging and
purpose from day one.
