---
title: "Untitled"
date: 2024-01-01
description: "In the relentless drive of startup culture, the difference between thriving and surviving often boils down to how we make our choices, especially in..."
tags:
  - 'startups'
  - 'time-management'
  - 'planning'
image: "rethink-outbuild.webp"
draft: false
---

In the relentless drive of startup culture, the difference between thriving and
surviving often boils down to how we make our choices, especially in building
versus buying. This isn't just about choosing between options; it's about
transforming your entire approach to ensure efficiency, creativity, and impact.
Forget the old playbook of constant creation; let's explore how doing less can
mean achieving more.

![A man in a business suit is talking on a smartphone, standing against a wall with a graffiti-style drawing that spells 'PRODUCTIVITY' and doodles of checklists and targets.](rethink-outbuild.webp)

## 1. Embrace Strategic Laziness:

### Old Thinking:

Building fast is always the best path to success.

### New Mindset:

Strategic laziness—doing less to achieve more, often more quickly. It's
recognizing that the fastest lane might not be the one you build yourself but
one already moving. In the rapid pace of startup life, stopping and considering
whether an existing solution can accelerate your journey is crucial. Before
committing to building, evaluate if there's a route already cleared and ready
for you; just a call (or click) away. In the race to innovate, the most
successful often win by knowing when to sprint and when catching a ride is the
smarter move.

## 2. Value Time as Your Premier Currency:

### Old Thinking:

Pinching pennies is paramount; every expense is scrutinized.

### New Mindset:

**Time is the ultimate startup currency.** Consider it the gold reserve in your
vault — precious, finite, and what determines your venture's wealth. It's not
just about spending less money but investing time wisely to yield the most
significant returns. Before making any decision, weigh the time cost as heavily
as financial ones, ensuring that each minute is spent moving you closer to your
goals, not just saving dollars.

## 3. Cultivate an Ecosystem Mindset:

### Old Thinking:

If we need it, we should build it.

### New Mindset:

No startup is an island. Embrace the ecosystem of tools and services already
available. Think of it like attending a potluck dinner. Why spend hours cooking
when you can bring the best pie from the bakery down the street? It's about
contributing with intelligent choices, not just hard work. By effectively
selecting and integrating existing solutions, you save time and add value
efficiently, ensuring you're always bringing something delightful.

## 4. Prioritize Adaptability Over Perfection:

### Old Thinking:

The solution must meet all our needs precisely as envisioned.

### New Mindset:

**Adaptability trumps perfection.** Think of it as choosing the right pair of
shoes for a hike. You don't need the most high-tech, feature-packed boots to
enjoy the trail; you need something reliable and fit for the purpose. Similarly,
seek solutions good enough for your business goals—effective, efficient, and
ready to go the distance without the unnecessary bells and whistles. After all,
the best tool is the one that gets you moving toward your destination, not the
shiniest one in the store.

## 5. Learn the Art of Good Enough:

### Old Thinking:

Everything we build should be a masterpiece.

### New Mindset:

**Embrace 'good enough' for non-core functions.** Not every tool or system needs
to be a Sistine Chapel ceiling. Sometimes, a well-painted bedroom wall is all
you need to move on to the next big thing.

---

As entrepreneurs, we're drawn to challenges, thriving on the thrill of solving
complex problems. But only some challenges are worth the chase. When we chose
the grand adventure of creating a business (or joining someone on that journey),
we also decided to be selective, focusing our energy on battles that advance our
mission. These five mindset shifts remind us to approach each build vs. buy
decision with wisdom and discernment. It's not about taking on every problem;
it's about strategically conquering the right ones that lead to impactful and
efficient success. As you continue this journey, remember to embrace the
challenges that matter, delegate or bypass those that don't, and always steer
your venture towards more intelligent, sustainable growth. Here's to building a
business and a legacy of wise decisions and strategic victories.
